Title: Raspberry Pi Jukebox
Date: 21-11-2014 21:12
Category: Raspberry Pi
Tags: Raspberry Pi, MPD
Summary: Turn you Raspberry Pi into a network controlled Music Player
Status: Published

If you have a Raspberry Pi and some spare speakers you can turn your Raspberry
Pi into a music player that can be controlled remotely from your Laptop,
Computer, Tablet or Smart Phone. Once you have done the basic set up you can
remove any attached screens, keyboards and mice and run it completely remotely. 

The software that we are going to be using to manage the music library and play
music is [Music Player Daemon (MPD)](http://www.musicpd.org/). MPD is a very
simple program all it does is manages the database of music, organises playlists
and plays the audio files. You then use a client to interact with MPD to, for
example, tell it what you want to play.

### What you will need

* **A Rapberry Pi with Raspbian installed** -
This should work with any model but you may need a USB WiFi dongle to connect
to the network.
* **Some Speakers** - A set of speakers that you can connect to your Raspberry
Pi so you can hear the music you are playing.
* **Some Music** - Some music to listen too.

### Setting up 

First you need to set up your Raspberry Pi and install Raspbian.
Once you have Raspbian installed you can connect it to your network how you do
this will depend on if you are using a wired or wifi connection.

The best source of information for how to do this is the
[Official Rasberry Pi documentation](http://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/)
for setting up your Rasberry Pi and Raspbian, configuring the network and
the speakers.

### Installing and Configuring Music Player Daemon

Open a shell on your Raspberry Pi, update the apt database and use ```apt``` to
install the ```mpd``` and ```mpc``` packages. These packages contain the main
MPD program and a simple client to interact with MPD.

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install mpd mpc
```

The default setting that come in with MPD should be suitable for our purposes.
However if you are curious and want to find out more they are stored in
```/etc/mpd.conf```. You can also use the ```man``` command to find out more
about the individual settings.

```bash
man mpd.conf
```

### Adding your Music

By default MPD look for audio files in ```/var/lib/mpd/music```.

You can copy your music into this directory.

```bash
cp /path/to/your/music/files/* /var/lib/mpd/music
```

Once you have copied your music in you need to tell MPD to update your library.

```bash
mpc update --wait
```

Depending on how many files you have this might take a few minutes. However one
it has completed you can get MPD to tell you some statistics about the files you
just added.

```bash
mpc stats
```

This will print out something similar to the below. However it will show the
number of different Artists, Albums and Songs you just added to you library.

```
Artists:     44
Albums:     217
Songs:    11270

Play Time:    6 days, 12:52:12
Uptime:       70 days, 5:20:56
DB Updated:   Sat Feb 21 23:29:58 2015
DB Play Time: 133 days, 10:40:55
```

Now that you have some music in you library you can test everything is working
by playing something. First list all the tracks that you have in you library,
then add some tracks to a playlist and start playing the playlist.

```bash
mpc listall
mpc add some/song/name
mpc play
```

Once you have tested that it is working correctly you can stop what is playing
with ```mpc```.

```bash
mpc stop
```

You can use the ```man``` command to find out more about ```mpc```.

```bash
man mpc
```

### Clients

So far we have only been using the ```mpc``` client.
This is not the only client for MPD. Since MPD is open-source there are many
alternative such as 
[mpdroid](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.namelessdev.mpdroid)
for Android and [Auremo](https://code.google.com/p/auremo/) for Windows.
You can find a big list of clients including a native client for the Wii
([WiiMPC](http://mpd.wikia.com/wiki/Client:WiiMPC)) on the
[MPD wiki](http://mpd.wikia.com/wiki/Clients).

### Additional Steps

Copying all the music into ```/var/lib/mpd/music``` is not ideal a Raspberry Pi
will be running on a SD Card which has limited space.
However there are alternatives you could load the music off an external USB Hard
Disk Drive or from a network share.
There are plenty of tutorials on the internet that explain how to mount external
drive and network shares on Linux so that won't be covered here.

Once you have mounted the extra share you can create a symbolic link to the 
external drive from the MPD music directory.

```bash
ln -s /path/to/external_drive /var/lib/mpd/music/external_drive
```

MPD will follow the symbolic link and add any music in the external drive to
the library when you use your client to tell MPD to update the library.

This guide has only just scratched the surface of what MPD can do. Hopefully it
encourage you to investigate what it can do yourself.
